---
weight: 1
bookFlatSection: true
title: "India in Transition (1927)"
---
##Present Situation-Review and Perspective.

Strong cross-currents have always been the feature of the political movement of modern India. In the last three years, this feature has becomes more and more remarkable in proportion as the nationalist movement acquired strength and assumed dimensions positively alarming to the British authorities. It is since 1918 that the movement for national liberation began to spread beyond the narrow circle of the middle-class and affect the masses of the people. The growing disaffection of the people at large has added potentiality to the nationalist movement. But the very awakening of the masses, which has enabled the political movement of the bourgeoisie to outgrow the stage of agitation and propaganda and enter into an active fight, has at the same time brought into evidence another cross-current which threatens  to turn the tide in the near future. It marks the initiation of a triangular fight, in which class anatagonism and the national struggle will be intensified side by side. The development of the bourgeoisie stiffens the national struggle as well as intensifies the class-cleavage by creating a proletarian class. This process of class-readjustment has been going on in India within the last few years and the political movement must be affected by it.

Indian nationalism, whether of the progressive character and of evolutionary tactics, as advocated by the Moderates now in League with the Impe rialist Government, or based on the integralist theory of the Extremists, orthodox in social tendancies, is fundamentally a bourgeois movement. Excepting the religious orthodox, — whose violent outbursts not so much against the British Government as against the "Western Civilization" it stands for, do not make them any less the exponents of the forces of reaction, — all shades of opinion in the national movement tend consciously or unconsciously, to the enhancement of the material interests of the intellectual and propertied middle-class. Even the reactionary nationalism of the orthodox religionists, in its purely political activities, finds itself obliged to back the bourgeoisie.

This was proved when the greatest stalwart of religious nationalism, Tilak, formulated the theory of attaining Swaraj by fostering the growth of indigenous industries. As the present moment, Gandhi also tries to save the spiritual civilization of India through the aggrandizement of the merchants and manufacturers.

The representative institutions demanded by the evolutionary Moderates, when fully inaugurated, will open the gates of the paradise lost more than a hundred and fifty years ago, to the intellectual and capitalist bourgeoisie. Free access to the higher administrative posts will be allowed to the former, while fiscal autonomy will mean the protection of Indian industries by means of tariff barriers against all foreign competitors, including England herself. Only in that case. Boycott of foreign goods, considered by the Extremists to be a powerful weapon in the political struggle, can be used with effect. The following extract from the address of the Chairman of the Reception Committee of the Calcutta Congress 1890, contains the fundamental doctrines and object of bourgeois liberal nationalism.

>"It is perfectly correct that the ignorant classes whom we seek to represent are still unable to take an active interest in the many social and administrative problems which are now engaging the attention of the educated class; but history teaches us that in all the countries and in all ages, it is the thinking who lead the un-thinking, and we are bound to think for ourselves and for those who are still too ignorant to exercise that important function".

Himself a rich lawyer, as well as belonging to the landed aristocracy, the speaker of these words voiced what his class, still in a backward stage of development, understood by a national government based on principles of popular representation. It is the rule of the national bourgeoisie which the Congress sought for; the Moderates as well as the Extremists, the progressive liberals as well as the orthodox religionists, all agree on this political conviction in their nationalism.

The Extremists, who have always based their nationalism on the superiority of India's spiritual civilization, in the field of pure politics prove themselves equally ardent defenders of the material interests of the national bourgeoisie. On supporting the Resolution of Self-Government in the Lucknow Congress of 1916, Tilak, the great advocate of the ,, common people" said; "I would not care if they (rights of self-government) are granted to the lower and lowest classes of the Hindu population, provided that the British Government considers them more fit than the educated classes of India; for exercising those rights". These words contain a challenge to the possible thought that the lower classes are and can be better fitted than the educated classes to exercise the rights and privileges accruing from political autonomy. In answer to a question put to him "whether the Indian masses would be any less exploited by the native bourgeoisie wielding political state power", Lajpat Rai once told that he would prefer to be kicked by his brother than by a foreigner. And above all, the program of fostering native industries betrays the bourgeois character even of the orthodox nationalism of the Extremists.

The movement for national liberation is a struggle of the native middle-class against the economic and political monopoly of the imperialist bourgeoisie. But the former cannot succeed in the struggle, nor even threaten its opponent to make substantial concessions, without the support of the masses of the people. Because the Indian middle-class is still weak numerically, economically and socially, hence the necessity of nationalism in the name of which the people can be led to fight; the victory gained in this fight however, will not change very much the condition of those whose blood it will cost. The Constitutional Democratic theories of the Moderates are beyond the comprehension of the common people, and therefore cannot be the motive force of Indian nationalism.

Their economic program, which proposes to foster modern industries with native capital by every means, is bound nevertheless, to revolutionize the position of the toiling masses, and will eventually bring them within the reach of political agitation. But the deve lopment of a native capitalist class will at the same time, inevitably intensify the class-antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the working-masses. When the latter will begin the struggle earnestly, it is expected to be more of a social nature than a political move- ment for national liberation. Since 1918, the Indian movement has entered this stage. It may still have the appearance of a national struggle involving masses of the population, but fundamentally it is a social strife, the revolt of the exploited against the exploiting class, irrespective of nationality.
The Extremists, now called the Non-cooperators, have had better success than the Moderates in drawing the masses under the influence of Nationalism. But a closer study shows that it is not the demagogic methods nor the religious character attached to the nationalist campaign to which this apparent success is to be attributed. There are deeper economic reasons behind it. It is not by a better understanding of the social problem that the Extremists have succeeded where the Moderates failed. In fact, the reactionary tendency of orthodox extremism makes it blind to these social problems on whose radical solution depends the success of the Indian movement. The discontent and growing unrest among the masses, brought about by economic exploitation intensified during the war, was seized by the Congress under the leadership of the Extremists, and turned into a popular demonstration demanding national liberation. But in spite of their religious idiosyncrasies and orthodox inclinations, the social affiliation of the Extremists is identical with that of the Moderates. In the spontaneous mass-upheaval, they discovered the force which could be utilized for the triumph of the native bourgeoisie. But they could not develop the potentiality of the mass movement by leading it in accordance with its economic urges and social tendencies. Their tactics were to strengthen the nationalist movement by the questionable method of exploiting the ignorance of the masses. And the best way of exploiting the ignorance of the masses was to make a religion of nationalism. This tactics led to the appearance of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi on the political horizon, and the temporary eclipse of all other politico-social tendencies in the shade of Gandhism, which has reached a crisis after having swept the country for two years.

In Gandhism culminates all the social tendencies that have always differentiated the two principles of Indian nationalism. In fact, Gandhism is the acutest and most desperate manifestation of the forces of reaction, trying to hold their own against the ob- jectively revolutionary tendencies contained in the liberal bourgeois nationalism. The impending wane of Gandhism signifies the collapse of the reactionary forces and their total elimination from the political movement.

Ever since its inception, the political movement of modern India has contained two tendencies of diverse character. Progressive politically and revolutionary in social questions, the one has always been evolutionary and compromising in tactics. In spite of its apparently intransigeant attitude towards the foreign domination, the other is reactionary socially. Notwithstanding its subjectively reformistic character, the first is and has always been objectively revolutionary because its social basis is the bourgeoisie, and it is conscious of the fact. But this tendency has failed and will always fail to play any outwardly revolutionary role because the conditions for a purely bourgeois revolution do not exist in India. The Indian national movement is not a struggle of the commercial and industrial middle-class against decrepit feudalism. The Indian bourgeoisie is not engaged in a class-struggle. The basis of the national movement is the rivalry of a weak and suppressed bourgeoisie against its immensely stronger imperialist prototype controlling the state power. To its great misfortune, the Indian middle-class was long-ago deprived of its historic role of freeing the productive classes from the fetters of feudal bondage. The present fight of the Indian bourgeoisie cannot be, therefore, unrelenting. Its growth and prosperity are not necessarily conditional upon the total destruction of its present enemy. Owing to this relative weakness of its social foundation, nationalism of the progressive tendency headed by the class conscious bourgeoisie, is bound to be compromising. It is inherently more inimical to the possible revival of social and political reaction than to the British rule which, in spite of itself, promises protection to the advent of capitalist civilization in Indian. A mass revolt temporarily swayed by the influence of orthodox nationalism, or actuated by the vigorous spirit of class- struggle, will be looked upon with equal apprehension by the progressive national democrats, conscious of their economic interests and social affiliation. Because, if the first is the case, it will signify a social and political reaction seriously detrimental to the still weak progressive movement, whereas a revolt of the working-class is always very dis quieting to the bourgeoisie. Both eventualities are more menacing to the interests of the liberal bourgeoisie than the British government. Therefore, the constitutional democrats, in spite of their revolutionary significance as an objective force, are not only not in a position to stir up and head a mass movement, but are very likely to be driven to the protecting arms of their imperialist peer in the event of such a movement, which is mortally menacing to the bourgeois institutions, so precious, so profitable, so congenial to the peaceful development of the middle-class.
Orthodox nationalism, on the other hand, is closer to the understanding of the people, and for this reason succeeds in provoking enthusiasm from time to time; but the reactionary tendencies inherent in it preclude the possibility of its ever becoming a dynamic revolutionary force, which alone is able to shake the foundation of foreign rule and start the people on the road to further progress. The backwardness of the people makes them respond more to religious nationalism than to constitutional democracy. The inevitable incapacity of the progressive bourgeoisie to assume the leadership of the national movement on a mass basis, left the ground at the command of orthodox nationalism which sought to incite the people against the foreign domination in the name of religion and culture. But they also failed, because the masses remained equally passive to the national movement based upon religion. At last the stings of economic exploitation exhausted their patience and religious calm, which owed their baneful origin and durability, to the very spiritual national culture they are called upon to defend. It was the narcotic effect of the much-vaunted "spiritual civilization" which kept the Indian masses apathetic to any movement for material progress. They have been taught to sacrifice the hallucinations of the phenomenal world in expectation of a blissful existence hereafter. The present awakening is a reaction against the age-long resignation, created by religious teachings and the tenets of spiritual culture. Therefore it cannot be used for a national movement tending towards the revival of the spiritual civilization of India. Here lies the contra- diction in the orthodox nationalism as expressed of late in the cult of Ghandhism. It endeavors to utilize the mass energy for the perpetuation or revival of that heritage of national culture which has been made untenable by the awakening of this energy. The orthodox Extremists in control of the Congress, freed from all Moderate influence, assumed the leadership of a popular mass movement national in appearance which contains, nevertheless, a challenge to all the fundamental doctrines of orthodox nationalism. Therefore, the intention of the present Congress, which has acquired the status of a political party, to unite the people of all classes in a struggle for national liberation to be carried on under the banner of Gandhism, is bound to be defeated. The signs of the impending defeat are already perceptible.

Gandhism will fall victim to its own contradictions. By Gandhism is meant the school of nationalism which has been reigning supreme in the Indian movement during the last three years. It can be put in another way: The Indian national movement, actuated by the spirit of Gandhism cannot succeed, be- cause in that case it would defeat its own end. In spite of the pious desire of its leaders, post-British India cannot and will not become pre-British India. The Indian people will not be able to overthrow foreign domination until and unless all that is cherished by orthodox nationalists have become things of the past, of venerable memory. ^ Sanctimonious antagonism to the "satanic Western civilization", a tendency which in spite of its /pathetic impotency, smacks of reaction, cannot be the life of a movement whose success will be marked by the crowning of the native bourgeoisie, who will prove to be as disruptive as the British ruler in so far as the social and religious ideals of orthodox nationalism are concerned. The victory of Indian nationalism will be the victory of the progressive middle-class, which may build a monument to the memory of the Mahatma for the valuable services he rendered them involuntarily, but which will never share his pious indignation against Western civilization, which is after all only a certain stage of social development through which every human community has to pass. This victory will be won, not through "suffering and soul-force", but with blood and tears and will be maintained by blood and iron. But it must come. The introduction of "Western civilization" so heartily hated by Gandhi is the reward of the fierce fight for national in- dependence to which he seeks to lead the people. He is working for something which is mortally antagonistic to the reactionary forces operating through him, and whose standard bearer he unconsciously is.

Before proceeding to review the happenings in the Indian movement since the beginning of the world war from the point of view stated above, it will be worthwhile to analyze Gandhism, because in it has found ample expression all the ebbing vitality contained in orthodox nationalism. The imminent collapse of Gandhism will close a romantic and exciting chapter of the -^ Indian national movement. It will demonstrate that a socially ^revolutionary movement cannot be influenced by reactionary forces. It will disclose the incompatibility between the national struggle having for its object the aggrandisement of the bourgeoisie and the revolt of the working masses against class exploitation, — a revolt which nevertheless has contributed strength to the Congress in the last years of its activities.

Although somewhat unique in its idiosyncracies and fanaticism, the Gandhi cult is not an innovation. Divested of the rebellious spirit and the shrewd politician in him, Tilak would resemble Gandhi in so far as religious beliefs and spiritual prejudices are concerned. But for his versatility in modern thoughts and characteristic looseness of conviction, Bepin Chandra Pal would perchance, join the Mahatma in the passionate denunciation of everything that adds to the material comfort of man. Had he been more of a monomaniac than a profound thinker with meta- physical pre-occupations, Arabinda Ghose would subscribe to Gandhi's philosophy, which pretends to command a rushing tide; "thus far shalt thou go and no farther". In the contemporary epoch outside India, Tolstoy has been the apostle of what Gandhi professes. In fact the latter is an avowed disciple of the former. Gandhism is nothing but petty-bourgeois humanitarianism hopelessly bewildered in the clashes of the staggering forces of human progress. The crocodile tears of this humanitarianism are shed ostensibly for the undeniable sufferings of the majority in capitalist society, but they are really caused by grief over the end of the old order, already destroyed or about to be so. It pines for that ancient golden age when the majority were kept in blissful ignorance in order that a few could roll in idle luxury, undisturbed by the revolt of the discontented; the spiritual culture of which was based on the barbarism of the people at large; the simplicity of which was the sign of its backwardness. This longing glance backwards is due, in some cases, to the con- summate intrigues of the forces of reaction, and in others, to in- voluntary subordination to the influence of the same agency. Its tendency towards a sort of religious or Utopian socialism proves that Gandhism, as well as its source Tolstoyism, belongs to the latter category. Or in other words, the services rendered by it to reaction, are involuntary.

It was in 1908 while still in South Africa that Gandhi for- mulated his philosophy of " Non-resistence" and "Soul-force" in a small book called "Indian Home Rule". It appears that since then he had not learnt anything nor had he forgotten anything till January 1921, when in the preface to the third edition of his book he confessed:
>"It (the book) teaches the gospel of love in the place of that of hate. It replaces violence with self-sacrifice. It pits soul- force against brute force. I withdrew (in this edition) nothing. . . But I would warn the reader against thinking that I am to- day aiming at the Swaraj described therein. I know that India is not ripe for it I am individually working for the self- rule pictured therein. But today my corporate activity is undoubtedly devoted to the attainment of parliamentary Swaraj in accordance which the wishes of the people of India. I am not aiming at destroying railways or hospitals, though I would certainly welcome their natural destruction. Neither railways nor /hospitals are a test of a high and pure civilization It requires a higher simplicity and renunciation than the people are today prepared for".

These passages make one suspect a wavering in the belief of the author. But the preceding as well as following para- graphs obviate such possible suspicions. Before declaring that the ideals of his philosophy are practically untenable in these days, Gandhi fortifies himself by the following confession of faith: "My /conviction is deeper to-day than ever. I feel that if India would discard modern civilization, she can only gain by doing so". And he reassures himself by declaring: "If India adopted the doctrine of love as an active part of her religion and introduced it in her politics, Swaraj would descend upon India from heaven". Gandhi's  quarrel is not with the British government, but with "Western civihzation" which is satanic according to his estimation. An Indian government, which would stand for bringing or fostering the same civilization, would be no more acceptable to him. Is there anything more incongruous than this —, that a man with such a philosophy should be at the head of a movement which strives for the establishment of a capitalist society? And is there any doubt whatsoever that Gandhism must discredit itself before long if the movement for national liberation is to go ahead?

Gandhi's criticism of modern civilization, that is, capitalist society, is correct. But the remedy he prescribes is not only wrong, but impossible. One need not be a sentimental humanitarian, nor a religious fanatic in order to denounce the present order of society in the countries where capitalism rules. But the knowledge of material and social sciences makes one see through the Christian piety of Gandhism, not only Indian, but International (there are Gandhis in every country) and discover the sinister forces of reaction busy in its depths. Its true social character no longer remains unknown on finding such tenets in its philosophy :
>"The more we indulge our passions, the more unbridled they become. Our ancestors, therefore, set a limit to our indulgences. They saw that happiness was largely a mental condition. A man is not necessarily happy because he is rich, or unhappy because he is poor. The rich are often seen to be unhappy, the poor to be happy. Millions will always remain poor. Observing all this, / our ancestors dissuaded us from luxuries and pleasures."
This sanctimonious philosophy of poverty is not unfamiliar. It has been preached by many prophets who have not only been proved false by history, but the questionableness of their humanitarianism has also been revealed. Such philosophy serves but one object, — to guarantee the safety of the vested interests, whose character may differ in different epochs but which essentially is always the same, being based on the right of exploitation of man by man.
Capitalist civilization is rotten; but it cannot be avoided. Neither is it permanent. It must pass away in due course of evolution, giving place to a higher order of society, as the ones preceeding it were replaced by it. But it will not collapse because sentimental humanitarians find it full of cruelty and injustice. It will break down under the pressure of its own contradictions. Whether we want it or not, it must be lived through somehow. It must be lived through in order that the fetters of moral and material ignorance that kept the human race bound hitherto can \'^ii be broken, and mankind in all countries may have the facilities ^ to strive for a higher stage of civilization. National freedom will not enable the people of India to go back, but to surge ahead.
In itself capitalist society has many defects; but it is undoubtedly an improvement on the patriarchal or feudal civilization for which Gandhi and his kind pine. Indian society is inevitably heading towards capitalist civilization, in spite of the premonitions -of Gandhi, among many other prophets of similar creed. The desire to see it hark back is as futile as to expect a river to rush back to its source. Caught in the morass of such hopeless contradictions, Gandhism cannot supply the ideology of Indian nationalism. The revolutionary character of the latter is contrary to it. Nevertheless, it is undeniable that Gandhism, better said, the personality of Gandhi, exercised a considerable influence on the Indian movement in the last three years. Or in other words, just about the time that the National Congress was finding the first response among the ranks of the working masses, it came under the domination of a spirit which is essentially reactionary and non- revolutionary in a very frank way. How did it happen? How could a revolutionary movement accept a leadership with antagonistic tendencies? This question leads us to a review of the movement.

The attempts made by the secret revolutionary societies to organize an armed uprising in the first year of the world war were easily thwarted. These organizations could be crushed, or pre- vented from constituting any serious danger, because they relied more upon conspiracies than upon revolutionary social forces. There was some discontent among the Indian soldiers, which was suffocated if not removed, by severe military measures. The masses of the people remained passive, while the educated lower- middle- class gloated over German victories and expected a pos- sible defeat of the British, which prospect was conducive to the success of Indian nationalism. But the political parties, without any remarkable exception, protested loyalty to the British govern- ment and offered unconditional assistence in the prosecution of the war. Even Tilak, who had just come out of jail after six years, was not an exception. The Congress, under the leadership of the Moderates representing the rich intellectuals and capitalist class, outdid everybody in these protestations of loyalty. But behind this mask of loyalty was to be noticed either an anxious expec- tation or a spiteful glee on all faces. A whisper ran through the length and breadth of the country that the British power was crumbling. Even in the far-off villages this whisper raised an echo. There was a period of suspense and tension.

In 1915 the military strength of the British Indian govern- ment was depleted to the minimum. All the available troops were sent out, and the new recruits, British as well as native, were qualitatively and quantitatively incapable of re^sting a pos- sible national upheaval. If there had been a revolutionary na- tional consciousness in the Indian people anywhere outside the small middle-class, that was the most opportune moment to strike

212



a blow which would have been mortal in all probablity. The loyalty professed so vigorously was false; there was much discontent and disaffection, but it had not yet contaminated the masses. The potentiality of this discontent was reduced to almost nothing when the capitalist class, the backbone of nationalism, unexpected- - ly found opportunities for industrial development. The mono- poly of imperiahst capital was made untenable by war conditions; the competition of manufactured goods imported from European countries, including England herself, was removed.r Indian in- dustries suddenly entered upon an era of spectacular growth. This economic revolution deprived the political movement of its most powerful social foundation. The intellectual and capi- / talist middle- class found it profitable to stand by the govern- ment. Obstacles to its industrial aspiration removed, the bour- geoisie had no more quarrel with the foreign ruler, at least for the time being. On the contrary, the new era of industrial develop- ment needed the protection of an estabUshed government. There- fore the loyalty of the bourgeoisie became real, and the leadership of the Congress sank into such sycophancy that to preside over its sesgion of 1915 was selected a man who combined in his person the landed aristocracy, rich hberal professions and officialdom. He was S. P. Sinha (later on Sir, then Lord, then His Britannic Majesty's Privy- Councillor etc. etc.) on whose head had been showered more blessings of governmental concessions than on any other Indian. He proved himself worthy of the innumerable distinctions received hitherto, and merited more that were to be bestowed subsequently, by uttering in his presidential address such sentiments as ; „in that critical time it was the duty of India to prove to the great British nation her gratitude for peace and the blessings of civiHzation secured to her under its aegis for the last hundred and fifty years and more." These words should not be taken as expressing the sentiments of a slavish individual. They were the voice of the class that he represented.

This remarkable abdication of the Congress betrays the innate weakness of the nationalist forces. That element, which is the most revolutionary from the objective point of view, is liable nevertheless, to make compromises in every critical moment, by virtue of the fact that its revolutionary energy is, not pitted against an enemy which would be unrelentingly hostile to it on the ground of class-struggle. Had the Indian bourgeoisie been fighting against

213



/a feudal absolution, no such compromise would be possible; be- cause the two could never be accomodated as is the case in the relation of the former with capitalist imperiahsm, which will always readjust its method of exploitation in the way of making concessions to its native partner before risking the eventual con- flict. This equivocal position of the socially revolutionary factor in the ranks of the nationalist movement, makes for the possibi- lity of the latter 's falling under the influence of the orthodox ^■school. Thd reactionary forces behind orthodox nationaUsm^make it subjectively more hostile to British rule. The Zs>n- tagonism between the reactionary tendencies of orthodox natio- naUsm and the modern civihzation which the British domi- nation embodies, is much more deep-seated and uncompromising than the rivalry between the Indian and British bourgeoisies.

The interests and aspirations of the economically bankrupt lower middle-class not being identical with those of the rich in- tellectuals and capitalist bourgeoisie, the arrangements that give temporary satisfaction to the latter, do not remove the grievances of the former, thus leaving it in a discontented frame of mind which gets worse. When by virtue of their compromising tactics, the Moderates forfeit the leadership of the movement, the lower middle-class, steps in. The latter's economic position makes it more intransigeant, more extremist in its poUtical demands. But nthe petty -bourgeois social bearing of the Extremists makes them '' isusceptible to the influence of the forces of reaction masquerading lin the garb of such cults as* spiritual civilization, humanitarianism and the Uke. On account of its reactionary tendencies, orthodox nationaHsm, embraced by the discontented petty bourgeoisie, is more uncompromising in its fight against foreign rule, which is the personification of a social order mortally inimical to its ideals. But doomed to death by the imperious verdict of history, it cannot infuse any vitality in the national movement in spite of its more revolutionary appearance. Nevertheless, its bitter hostility to modern civihzation enables it to be more uncompromising to Bri- tish rule, and therefore to take up the fight and carry it on further than the point at which the Moderates desert it. This was^the social reason which explains how the Indian national movement in its most revolutionary period, could be actuated by such a reactionary philosophy as Gandhism.

The second year of the war found the rich intellectual and

214



bourgeois leaders of the national movement reconciled to the British rule and actively supporting it, at a time when it could possibly have been overthrown or at least substantial concessions wrung from its reluctant hand, by threats of withholding assistence to conduct the war. But such measures were altogether unthink- able for the Moderate Party, whose economic interest would be jeopardised more by the unsettled conditions that were most likely to follow a premature overthrow of the British government than by its continuation, specially when the latter was forced by unexpected circumstances to modify, if not abandon, its former eco- nomic policy. The position of the Moderates at that critical moment was very well formulated in the following words of B. L. Mittra, one of their leaders:

"The Moderates consider co-operation with the EngUsh ne- cessary for national development, political, industrial, economic / and otherwise. The Extremists would straight away assume full responsibility of government; the Moderates think that would lead to chaos, and would proceed by stages. It is the difference between cataclysm and evolution. The Extremists' ideal is destruction of the existing order of things in the hope that some- thing better will take its place, for nothing can be worse than what is; the Moderates' ideal is for formation of a new order of things on definite progressive lines".

But the very possibility of economic and industrial develop- ment which satisfied temporarily the aspirations of the rich bour- geoisie, promised the emergence of another social factor which would be more revolutionary than both the poUtical parties ''" hitherto sharing the leadership of the national movement. The rapid development of large scale machine industries and the emer- gency extension of the already existing ones,- led to the concen- tration of the masses of working people in cities with utterly in-^ sufficient accomodation for the sudden influx of additional in- habitants. The sudden increase in the number of consumers was very readily taken advantage of by the speculating traders. Con- sequently prices went up so much, that they exceeded the limits of the miserable wages in the newly-grown capitalist industries. All the effects of a social readjustment resulting from a sudden industrial revolution were felt. Potential causes of a mass revolt were to be expected from such a situation. Increased export caused an acute scarcity of food grains. The burden of forced con-

215



tribution to the war loans, so liberally subscribed to by the loyal

landed aristocracy, who transferred then immediately on to the shoul- ders of the poor cultivators, prepared the ground for an agrarian revolt. Then, the petty-bourgeoisie and the lower middle-class were still smarting under their unredressed grievances; their hopeless economic condition could not be expected to improve in any way by the prospect of a great industrial development or administrative reforms. The surrender of the progressive Moderates left all these revolutionary forces either partially mani- fest, or still brewing under the surface, without political leader- ship. The field was clear for orthodox nationalism. Reaction sought to unite all these unconscious forces of revolution in a movement ostensibly anti-British, but really, and according to. the confession of the orthodox leaders, to combat the advent of a new order which was denounced as "satanic" or "sordid mate- rialism". All those revolutionary forces directly or indirectly tended towards the destruction of Imperialism, as the rankest manifestation of class -domination; reactionary nationalism also desired the overthrow of British rule; but with a different pur-

, pose. A common foe made for the alliance of these two most incompatible, nay antagonistic tendencies. And the ignorance

/of the masses, aided by the lack of social or political conviction of the petty-bourgeoisie, handed the leadership of the movement

■ over to the orthodox Extremists.

The advent of native orthodoxy in the person of Gandhi was preceded by a reaction voluntarily or involuntarily serving

^ the cause of Imperialism. Annie Besant was its apostle. She was seemingly an avowed spirituaUst dreading all contamination of things material, but in reality a masked defender of the inte- rests of the imperialist bourgeoisie to which she belonged, in spite of her Irish birth. She had always been a champion of the British Empire, which she chose to call the foundation of a real League of Nations. Her ideal of the League of Nations was evidently the incorporation of the whole world in the British Empire. The same instinct, which thirty years ago had induced the liberal im- perialist Hume to promote the idea of founding the National Congress, led Mrs. Besant to arise from her theosophical esoterics, in which she had immersed herself ever since she came to India, and pollute her holiness which such sordid materialism as politics. Her instinctive zeal for the welfare (not spiritual) of the imperialist

216



bourgeoisie disquieted her at the sight of the ominous clouds gathering on the political horizon. Long residence in the country and intimate relation with the lower middle- class intellectuals, enabled her to gauge the situation cleverly. She set out with the mission of stemming the rising tide of revolution. '

Unnoticed by the bourgeois poHtical parties, a new combi- nation of social forces was in the process of consummation. The imminent spontaneous upheaval of the working masses, both in the cities as well as in the countryside, would open up a new vision to the de-classed young intellectuals dissipating their re- / volutionary energy in futile conspiracies. The revolt of the oppressed masses and the ruthless manner in which such a revolt would surely be suppressed by the government with the aid and conniv- ance of the national bourgeoisie, would clarify their social ten- dencies, thus rescuing them from the vicious circle of orthodox nationalism, and push them forward into the healthy and envi- gorating atmosphere of an inevitable class- struggle against the - native as well as the foreign exploiting class. Once launched on such a consciously revolutionary road, the Indian national move- ment would soon acquire real strength. It would throb with the vitality of mass -action. Neither British oppression, nor the com- promising tactics of the bourgeoisie, nor the questionable ortho- doxy of the reactionary religionists would be able to check or distort the victorious march of such a movement.

This was a gloomy prospect for imperial domination as well as that of which the native bourgeoisie was dreaming in the name of national independence. How could such a fatal eventuality be averted? An outburst of orthodox nationalism tickling the spiritual imperialism of the young revolutionaries, supplemented by a show of extremism in political demands, might be expected to save the situation. Mrs. Besant captured the imagination and admiration of the revolutionarily-incHned young intellectuals by preaching with her wonted eloquence the famihar gospel of the spiritual superiority of Indian over Western culture, and con- demning the British government as the worst munifestation of Western materialism from which, she exclaimed, the innocent children of sacred India must be saved. Thus a wrong channel was opened for the great revolutionary wave that was raising its majestic crest on the offing of the society. Essentially a socio- ^ economic struggle, the impending movement must assume a poH-

217



tical manifestation with considerable latitude for nationalist pre- occupations. The astuteness of Mrs. Besant caught on to the

•^ familiar, but harmless, political slogan of "Home Rule" which swung the Extremists on her side, because it promised to lead the movement abandoned by the Moderates. In consequence, those who might have sought the destruction of British domi- nation with the aid of revolutionary mass-action, committed themselves to the ambigous programe of Self-government within the British Empire. Mrs. Besant rendered a valuable service to the imperial cause so dear to her, although the bureaucratic government did not seem to appreciate her merits and made a pseudo martyr of her.

The prospect of a mass-upheaval completely drove the pro- gressive bourgeoisie into the protecting arms of its imperialist peer, but inspired the orthodox Extremists, who stepped into the control of the movement. Under their leadership it assumed a politically aggressive character, but its social significance was confused for the time being. Mrs. Besant could not prevent the inevitable; she only prepared the ground for Gandhi, whose advent pushed her into well-merited disgrace. Both preached the doctrine of orthodox nationalism, but the difference lay in the respective objects in view. The former desired to save the

"/ Indians from modern materialism in order to insure the continu- ance of British domination, while the latter's hostility to Western

•^ civilization was fomented by the apprehension that it would strike at the root of the religious, intellectual and patriarchal vested interests which, in the name of spiritual culture, held the Indian masses in moral as well as material bondage.

In 1916 the National Congress entered upon a new chapter of its history. From that year it ceased to be the loosely organized deliber-ative body that it had been so far, and assumed the charac- ter of a cohesive poUtical party-, a fighting organ. The political

V program of the Extremists was completely adopted, though the Moderates still participated in the Congress, and one of the most mediocre from their midst was chosen to preside over the session of 1916 held in Lucknow. The embarassing position of the imperial power, together with the first indications of a popular awakening, encouraged the Congress. It decided to demand an adequate price for the support which the Indian bourgeoisie was willing to render the British government. The latter had already shown

218



an inclination to make concessions by placing with the native factories large orders for war materials, by encouraging war pro- duction in industrial plants owned by native capital, and lastly-^' by appointing a commission to investigate the possibilities of mod- ern industries in India and devise ways and means of fostering them by native capital. Something more significant happened to show that the British government was serious in its new policy of compromise. Just before his extended term of office was over in the middle of 1916, the then viceroy Lord Hardinge was known to be engaged in drafting a scheme of reforms which would cater [ liberally to the ambitions of the bourgeoisie, as represented by the i Moderates. Then, the talk of a radical reconstruction in imperial i relations after the war reached the ears of the Indian bourgeoisie. \ The British Premier Asquith's promise that in consideration of I her war services India would be looked at from "a new angle i of vision" was interpreted as the offer of dominion status with a I government responsible to the Indian people. All these factors : contributed to the crystallization of such a f eehng that the Luck- / 1 now Congress (1916) swayed clear to the left. It was dominated ■. by the Extremists' outlook in spite of its Moderate president.

It was not only the Congress dominated by Extremist poli- ticians that reflected the vigor felt by the bourgeoisie. It was manifested in another and quite unexpected way. Before the I Congress met, the elected members of the Legislative Council, ^^ which owed its existence to the Morley Reforms of 1909, presented a memorandum to the government demanding an immediate I readjustment in the state administration. The repeal of the f Arms Act and the organization of an Indian volunteer corps were very energetically pressed. The necessity of, mending the auto- cratic character of the British Indian government and qi trans- :, f erring some of its power to the elected representatives of the !l people was emphatically urged. The memorandum expressed I the point of view of that section of the bourgeoisie already in al- ? liance with the government, which raised its voice to say that if the government desired to be assured of its valuable services, I it must show an inclination to pay a reasonable price. Still looking I up to the British government as an indispensable protection, the r bourgeoisie was encouraged to assume such an aggressive attitude not only through its growing economic importance, but mainly because of the awakening mass-energy, which could_be utilized -

219



for backing up the demands made. Constitutional agitation was replaced by the hagglings of a bargainer. The mass awakening was not yet a conscious movement. But the politically minded middle-class felt the impulse of strength proceeding from the knowledge that the people would follow its lead. The bour- ' geoisie's claim to national leadership was at last materializing.

What had been formulated as the ultimate goal of the Con- gress in 1906 was categorically demanded in 1916. In return for the Indian people's support of the war, immediate self-govern- ment (dominion status) and complete fiscal autonomy were asked for. Both the wings of the Congress, the Moderates as well as the Extremists, subscribed to this demand. It fell to the lot of Surendra Nath Banerji, the Moderate veteran and one of the founders of the Congress, to move the resolution of self-govern- ment. The president in course of his speech formulated the de- mand as follows:

"India must cease to be a dependency and be raised to the status of a self-governing state, as an equal partner with equal rights and responsibilities, as an independent unit of the empire".

He declared that a "bloodless revolution" was already in progress, and a resolution was passed requesting that "the King Emperor should issue a proclamation announcing that it is the aim and intention of the British policy to confer self-government on India at an early date".

Another epoch-making feature of the Lucknow Congress was the unconditional endorsement of its program and demands by v/the All-India Moslem League simultaneously in session in th* same city. This rapprochment of the two great rival, if not anta- gonistic communities, culminated in the so-called Congress-League Scheme formulated and issued as the program of the Indian Na- tional Movement in August 1917. Self-government within the British Empire, with complete fiscal autonomy was the slogan, and the Congress in which its sister Moslem organization was in- corporated, entered the period of an active political fight.

At this point it is necessary to make a retrospective study in order that the full significance of this rapprochement may be well understood. Except for one or two solitary figures, the foun- ders of the National Congress were all non-Moslems. Orthodox nationalism was based upon aggressive Hinduism. The Extremist Party was born and developed as a Hindu party. It was actuated

220



I by Hindu religion; its ideology was derived from Hindu philo- / ^ sophy. The ruling power of the land till but a relatively short time ago, the Mussalmans, at least the upper class with the blood ? of the conquering race, did not consider themselves the same I as the Hindu population. With their fierce fanaticism, they could not be expected to feel themselves an integral part of the Indian people, welded together by rehgious consciousness and cul- tural traditions. Then, on account of a higher grade of social development, the Hindu intellectuals responded more readily to those progressive political and social thoughts which made for the birth of modern nationalism and the eventual foundation of the Congress. When the Western educated Hindu intellectuals began the agitation for representative government, the Mussal- mans would not have anything to do with them. The latter looked upon the former with suspicion. The Hindus were in the majority in the bulk of the population as well as in the intellectual and propertied middle-class.*) A government based upon the principles of national repre sentation threatened ^ to be a Hindu supremacy. Naturally the Mussalmans were not / very enthusiastic over a movement fraught with such possibili- ties. In fact, the landed aristocracy and the comparatively few intellectuals among them were decidedly hostile to such a move- ment. This attitude of theirs gave the foreign ruler the oppor- tunity of using the large Islamic community as an opposition to the nationalism of the Congress. And the imperialist government did use this weapon very cleverly and not without effect. But ; the blame for this lack of unity among the Hindus and Moslems i is not to be laid entkely at the doors of the government, whose "divide and riile" poUcy could not have succeeded had there not been confUcting interests between the two communities. As soon as both communities came to have identical material inte- rests, their union in a poHtical movement could not longer be pre- vented by the cleverest artifices of the government, nor by the traditional religious antagonism.

The masses of both the communities were equally indifferent to questions political. They lived for centuries side by side in the same villages, engaged in the same occupation of toiling for the maintainance of an extravagantly luxurious ruling class.

*) According to the census of 1921, there are 70,000,000 Mohamedants out of a total population of 319,000,000.

221



Religious antagonisms, which undoubtedly did exist, could not however interfere with the unavoidable phenomenon that the society was divided into two classes, the exploited lower class and the exploiting upper class. People professing antagonistic religions were to be found in the ranks of both classes. For con-

/venience of exploitation, religious antagonism was kept alive among the people by the upper class of both the communities. Fanaticism fed upon ignorance made such strategy possible. But the relation between the rich propertied classes of the two commu- nities could not be harmonious, either under the Mohamedan rule, nor afterwards. It was marked by bitter rivalry. The trading middle-class flourishing in the latter days of the Moslem empire was predominantly Hindu, while the ruling Islamic community remained in the backward social stage of feudalism. The British conquest found the Moslem population generally divided into feudal landlords and peasantry. In accordance with the policy | of British imperialism in its earlier days, the feudal rulers as well < as the landed aristocracy were crushed politically and militarily : to a state of impotency, — to be preserved, petted and pampered later on. This being the case, the social basis for a liberal intelli- gentsia was absent in the Moslem community at the time of the British conquest, and it was long before such a social factor could come into being during the British period.

When the Hindu liberal intellectuals organized the National Congress, the few modern educated Mohamedans that existed

/in the country belonged exclusively to the landed aristocracy of feudal descent. By class affiliation, these were not prone to pro- gressive ideas, either political or social. Sir Syed Ahmed Khan, an aristocratic intellectual, did the pioneer work in starting ( 1 880) the Aligarh College, with the intention of bringing modern edu- cation within the reach of Moslem youths without tampering i with the religious prejudices and susceptibilities of his reactionary ; community. Unlike the Hindu middle-class, the Moslems were ' still in a stage of social development which was not conducive to the introduction of secular education. The separation of edu |/cation from religion was looked upon with great apprehension and was universally opposed. Despite his progressive tendencies, Syed Ahmed Khan had to bow down before the forces of reac- tion stUl rampant in the Moslem community and compromise; on an adjustment of modern secular education with theological

222



teaching in the Aligarh College. He sought to get as many young men as possible educated in modern ways compatible with the tenets of Islam, which, reflecting the tendencies of his commu- nity, he held to be indispensable for and more conducive to the welfare of Moslem society than Western civilization. Neverthe- less, he looked upon British rule as a providential contact, — and implicit loyalty to it was the theme of all his educational and public activities. Under his zealous patronage, Aligarh came to be the Eton of Moslem India. The intellectual centre of the rich aristocracy, its concession to modern education amply counter- balanced by a good dose of theological training, AUgarh naturally failed to produce youthful elements holding social and political ideas similar to the Hindu intellectuals who conceived of a poli- tical nationalism as expressed in the organization of the National Congress. While the earUer generation of the Hindu modern intelligencia became "denationalized", or in other words, were capable of imbibing fully progressive social and political thoughts, the products of Ahgarh were staunch Mussalmans above all, and implicit in their loyalty to the British government. This loyalty however, did not speak for any special characteristic of the Moslem community. It was a natural and inevitable outcome of the so- cial position the Moslems occupied in those days. Besides it was provoked by instinctive rivalry and suspicion against a move- ment whose success, even partial, would mean a Hindu supre- macy in Indian politics. And in those days, to the Moslem upper class of feudal origin, Hindu domination was by no means a better prospect than British rule, which was always willing to show them favoritism. The absence of a class-cohesion was respon- sible for the political divergence between the Hindus and Mos- lems. Those of the former, who inaugurated the agitation for representative government and social reforms, were intellectual bourgeoisie, whereas the Ahgarh alumni, on whom were showered the good graces of the British government, belonged to the landed aristocracy with social and political tendencies predomiantly feudal. Elements so diverse socially could not unite in a national movement. The foreign ruler was not slow in finding this social divergence and communal rivalry, and made full use of them.

The Moslem intellectuals remained loyal to British rule be- cause feudal cla^ affiUation rendered them unresponsive to the progTEssive polifcieal thoughts embraced and propagated by their

223



Hindu contemporaries. Theirs was not loyalty to British rule as such, but loyalty to a particular social order they were zealous to preserve. If they were hostile to the Congress, it was not for its alleged "seditious" character, but because it represented a tendency inimical to the social, political and religious institutions and traditions cherished as ideal by them. Their support and sympathy for British rule were not purchased, as is generally believed, by petty favoritism, but originated in the belief that

'British rule would provide a protection for the social order and religious institutions they desired to preserve, and which, they apprehended, would be endangered if the Hindu liberals were to be given their way. This apprehension was corroborated by

/the growth of orthodox nationalism, which was bigotedly Hindu in character and therefore could not be expected to be looked upon with equanimityby the Moslems. It was not governmental favoritism, but class affiliation that first kept the Moslem intellec- tuals away from the Congress, and subsequently arrayed against it the forces of their community. The Moslems could not take / part in the national movement until there should arise in their midst a modern bourgeoisie divorced from all feudal connection, whose economic vision would not be limited to land-owning, but extended to commercial and industrial horizons.

Till the earlier years of the twentieth century, poUtically the Moslem intellectuals were less concerned with Indian affairs than with Pan-Islamism, which embodied the dream of a fede- ration of the Mussalman states; a sort of a romantic imperialism sanctified by religious authority. In this politico-religious move- ment, no force making for the growth of nationalism among the Indian Moslems was to be found. In fact, it was an impediment to the development of national consciousness. The Moslem in- tellectuals of modern India awoke, not to nationalism, but to the dream of an extra- national existence whose realization, how- ever, had been made impossible by various other factors outside India and beyond their control and comprehension. When the politically independent or semi-independent Moslem states like Persia and Turkey felt the call of nationalism as expressed in the revolutions of 1907 and 1908, the impracticability and illusive- ness of Pan-Islamism became apparent. The religious sohdarity of the Moslem world also proved to be little more than a pleasant myth, due to the silence and passivity with which the declaration

224



of Jehad by the Khalifa during the Tripolitan and Balkan wars was received by the faithful. On the other hand, the attitude of England during the Balkan war led the Indian Moslems to sus- pect the sincerity of the British patronage they had hitherto be- lieved in.

This double disillusionment made the Moslem intellectuals of India turn towards home politics. They could no longer re- main satisfied with the fond dream of Pan-Islamism, which failed to stand the test of experiment in a political as well as a religious sense; nor could they longer entrust the interests of their commu- nity entirely to the questionable patronage of the British. Pan- Islamism had been smiled upon by the British government so long as it remained a fashionable cult, harmless politically. It was a diversion for the young intellectuals who otherwise might run into mischief, in imitation of their Hindu contemporaries. But in the years following the Turkish revolution Pan-Islamism, under the spiritual leadership of the Comittee of Union and Pro- gress (Young Turk Party) took on the character of incipient im- perialism. Therefore the condescending smile with which the British Indian government had regarded the Pan-Islamism of Sultan Abdul Hamid, turned into a frown when it was converted into the Pan-Turanism of the Young Turks. The spread of Pan- Islamism of the new denomination threatened to be an anti- British movement, and could not be tolerated among the Indian Moslems. This led to a disruption of the relation hitherto sub- sisting between the Moslem middle-class of India and the British, government. But mere anti-British sentiment could not make the Moslems consider themselves as part of the Indian nation, predominated by Hindu ideology and traditions.

It was a factor of an entirely different nature which contributed to the tendency towards political nationalism in the Moslem community. This was the mercantile and industrial class, which developed quite independent of the religious unity of the Moslem world. Its interest in Pan-Islamism, where it existed, was purely that for a fashionable cult, without any vital attachment. It was the pohtical situation of India and the economic policy of the British government which had a vital bearing upon its own deve- lopment. The anti-British feelings created by events outside India, and spreading among the new generation of Moslem intellectuals, did not affect the Moslem capitalist class, which looked upon British .



15



225



patronage as a necessary factor for its development. By the first years of the twentieth century had come into existence a small number of young intellectuals, the ideological pioneers of the Moslem bourgeoisie, who stood for nationalism in which religious and sectarian disputes should be submerged. But the first poUtical expression of the Moslem community was rather anti-nationaUstic than national. It was the organization of the All-India Moslem League, in which took part members of the loyal intellectual landed aristocracy and some of the mercantile and industrial class. In fact, the League was organized under the benign auspices of the British government, which wanted to make of it a Moslem opposition to Hindu nationahsm. Under the leadership of the religious aristocrat ,Aga Khan and the official reactionary Ameer Ali, the League ^ proved to be a willing instrument for the insidious designs of the British government. It emphatically protested "loyalty" as against the "seditious" attitude of the Hindu Congress, whose claim to national representation was challenged by the very organization of the League which pretended to voice the sentiment of the sixty- seven million Mohamedans.

Apart from being a bulwark against Hindu nationahsm, the League served another purpose of the imperialist government. It raised an opposition against the spread of Pan-Islamism in India. Already in the latter 90's Syed Ahmed Khan as leader of the liberal Moslems of India, had repudiated the title of the Turkish Sultan to the KhaUfat. For this act he had on his side the traditional authority of the Moslem emperors of Delhi, who never recognized the Turkish Sultan as their Lord Temporal and Spiritual. The founder and first leader of the League, Aga Khan himself claimed direct descent from the Prophet in his capacity as the spiritual head of the Khoza dissenters.

But the pronounced poKtical significance of the Moslem League, under its founders and old leaders, was the opposition to the National Congress, the realization of whose program of representative government would be tantamount to Hindu rule. The League came into existence on the very eve of the Extremist triumph over the Congress. Orthodox nationalism with its pronoun- ced religious ideology could not but arouse apprehension among the Mussalmans, Therefore the need of British protection was doubly felt by the latter. The Partition of Bengal, while a great butt of at- tack on the government from the nationalists of all shades of opinion,

226



received the approval of the newly born Moslem League; because one of the objects of the partition was to create a large province ^ with an overwhelming Moslem majority in the population. It was in this new province that the Hindu nationalism of the Extre- mists was very rampant, and the government did succeed in setting the reHgious fanaticism of the ignorant Moslem majority against it with disastrous results. The atrocities committed on the Hindu minority by the infuriated Moslem mob egged on by the police, seriously harmed the possibility of a national unity embracing the people at large. In spite of all these lamentable consequences of the Partition, the Moslem League went so far as to warn the government, when it was considering its repeal, not to make hasty concessions which would make for a Hindu supremacy. It was in deference to the point of view put forth by the League that the Indian Councils Act of 1909, which was foUowed two / years later by the repeal of the Partition, was based on the principle of community representation, thus guaranteeing the Moslem minority a privileged position as a remuneration for its loyalty. But events outside India weakened the faith of the Moslem intellectuals in the good will of the British government, notwith- standing the loyalism of the League and the reciprocal favoritism of the government. Not a few of the young Moslem intellectuals joined the nationalist movement, and began to participate in the Cbngress. A middle-class had come into existence in the Moslem- community. It grew out of the poorer strata of the landed aristo- cracy and the commercial community. The modern educated youths of this class were violently anti-British on account of the ^• ripples of Pan-Turanism reaching India. Therefore they swelled the ranks of the Extremists in spite of their religious diversity. The news of the Turkish revolution stirred up the imagination of- these young enthusiasts, who sought connection with the Committee of Union and Progress, whose leaders were hailed as the saviours of the Moslem world. The loyaUst pohcy of the Moslem League was assailed by these young intellectuals who could be called revolutionary, considering their anti-British sentiment. But they were far from nationalism as yet. They were wilUng to join hands with the Hindu Extremists in order to destroy British imperialism, not for the national Hberation of the Indian people, but because they considered the British to be the mortal enemies of Islam. It was the spirit of Pan-Islamism which had an acute outburst in conse-

15* • 227



quence of the triumph of the Young Turks, who aspired to launch on an imperialist venture in the name of Islam, with the questionable friendship of the Pan- Germans. This wave of Pan-Turanism in India, did not go beyond the walls of the modern Madrassas whose number was very small, but a few members of the thin lower middle- class were also agitated by it. The rich upper class remained unshaken f in its loyalty, while the Moslem masses were electrified by it as much as the Hindus were by orthodox nationalism.

Nevertheless, the overthrow of reactionary loyalists like Aga

^Khan and Ameer AU from the leadership of the League brought the pohtical movement of the Moslems closer to the Congress. The new leaders of the League were mostly young middle-class intellectuals, and therefore susceptible to nationalism. Even before capturing the leadership, they had criticised the Leagues' advocacy of community representation as detrimental to national solidarity.

•^The gradual subordination of rehgious orthodoxy to the political radicalism of the Extremists, on the other hand, removed another cause which might have kept, and to some extent did keep, theMussal- man intellectuals away from the Congress. The growth of a capitalist

/bourgeoisie socially distinguished from the aristocratic scions of the reactionary feudal landlords, made the conception of national- ism possible among the Indian Moslems. This nationalism was distinct f rom a politico-rehgious movement on behalf of an imaginary world-federation of Islamic states; it was the nationalism of an • integral part of the Indian people. Reactionary Moslem landlords

'could be the object of governmental favoritism as against progressive Hindu intellectuals; but the interests of Mussalman capitalists were as hostile as those of the Hindus to imperialist exj^loitation^^ This being the essence of the situation, the years preceding the great world-war were marked by a steady closing of the ranks of the bourgeoisie, Hindu as well as Moslem, in the movement of political nationalism. In 1916, it was under the presidency of a rich merchant that the Moslem League made common cause with the Congress, which thus became the political organ of the national bourgeoisie, undivided by rehgious or sectional interests. * * *

The firm. attitude of the Congress, especially the Congress-

'' League Scheme, commanded the attention of the government,

which promptly showed indications of introducing such reforms

as would placate the native capitalist class, till then the driving

228



force behind the increasing vigour of the Congress. The first practical measure by way of these promised concessions was the increased rate of Customs duty imposed on the manufactured cotton imported*^ into India. This touched a vital spot by conceding a partial pro- tection, so persistently sought for, to the principal and most pros- perous Indian industry. It appeared to have had the desired effect. The Indian bomrgeoisie did not hesitate to pay the price demanded for this concession. A War Fund of £ 100,000,000 to be sent as a gift to England, was readily contributed. This partial protection was hailed by the Indian bourgeoisie as an earnest of further con- cessions that were to come, as the herald of the radical revision of the entire fiscal relation of the different parts of the Empire after the war, as promised by the government.

The schism between the two wings of the nationahst camp could no longer be averted, when the following declaration was simultaneously made by Montagu in the House of Commons and by the Viceroy, Lord Chelmsford, in Simla:

The pohcy of the British government henceforth was declared to be not only the "increasing association of Indians in every branch of administration, but also the greatest development of self-govern- ing institutions with a view to the progressive realization of re- -- sponsible government in India as an integral part of the British Empire".

This declaration complied with almost aU the demands of ^ the Moderates. For all those who happened to be free from distrust of the imperialistic policy, it was indeed a Uberal promise. The Moderate Party, that is, the rich intellectuals and big capitalists, y' hailed this declaration as the advent of a new era. They obviously did not beUeve that the imperiahst government would, without a struggle, concede to India that amount of Self-government which would practically make her lost to the empire. But they con- sidered it a mistake to press any further at that point. According to their estimation, enough had been secured, and it was advisable to consolidate the new acquisition and prepare for a further ad- vance in due course of time. Gandhi himself, still out of politics and engaged in humanitarian activities, in the beginning of 1915 defined Swaraj as partnership in the British Empire, and prescribed that the way to the realization of Swaraj was by services rendered for the successful prosecution of the war. At the outbreak of the war he had offered his services in an Indian Volunteer Ambulance

229



Corps, like the one he had organized and led to the great appreciation of the high command during the Boer War.

The British government, however, felt that the situation in India was much more serious than in 1908-9, in spite of the apparent loyalty of the bourgeoisie during the war and its grateful acceptance of the new reforms. Potential social factors, which did not exist before, had come into operation, and were beginning to make their influence felt on the nationalist movement. Imperial shrewd- y ness did not fail to foresee that the wave of popular revolt following the cataclysm of the world war could not leave India entirely imaffected. A mass upheaval would add dynamic strength to the nationalist movement. Therefore it was found necessary to con- vince a powerful social class that it had a stake in the existing government. The Moderates could not be ralHed by the government with so little as was found sufficient by the Uberal Morley in 1909. The rich bourgeoisie must be made to understand that their further development would no longer be obstructed by the British, in order that, for the continued maintainance of law and order as against the threatening popular disturbances, their unconditional support could be counted upon. With a safe road to progressive develop- ment open before it, the rich bourgeoisie would certainly throw its weight against a movement mainly destructive in character. JThe instinct to preserve vested interests, economic as well as political, would make the rich liberal and propertied bourgeoisie together with the landed aristocracy, opposed to all popular upheavals, threa- tening the subversion of the established order in favour of something uncertain, which could be either too reactionary or too radical. Neither eventuaUty was welcome.

These considerations determined the poUcy of the British government in the latter part of the. war and also in the post bellum years. The declaration made by the Secretary of State for India and the Viceroy in August, 1917 contained the following statement: "that substantial steps should be taken in this direction (of intro- ducing self-governing institutions) as soon as possible, and that it is of highest importance that there should be free and informal exchange of opinion between those in authority at home and India". The latter purpose took Montagu to India towards the end of the year. But dominated by the political extremism of the orthodox nationalists, the Congress in December 1917, reaffirmed the re- y'solntions of the previous year and declared that nothing less than

230



Home Rule would be acceptable. Here triumphed the spirit of Mrs. Besant who presided over the Congress of 1917. By intro- ducing the slogan o| Home Rule she saved India for the Empire; left alone, the Extremists, who controlled the Congress completely, might have repudiated the imperial connection, because the awaken- ing mass energy had fired their imagination. The reactionary nationahsm preached by Mrs. Besant and subsequently taken up ^ by Gandhi, was not compatible with that form of poKtical state which would be the corollary to Home Rule. But Mrs. Besant's reactionary designs concerned the political and not social aspect of the Indian movement. The reactionary tendencies contained in the orthodox nationalism of the followers of Tilak and the Gandhi- ites are social; therefore they would not brook any compromise with a political institution which would render them untenable. , They would demand complete separation from the British Empire / with the desire to save India from the unholy contamination of the sordid materialism of Western civilization, if they dared.

The publication of the Montagu-Chelmsford Reform Scheme forced a clear split in the ranks of the nationalists. The majority of the Moderates, though not fully satisfied by the reforms pro- mised, accepted them as a big step forward, while the Extremists / declared them to be utterly inadequate and rej ected them summarily. The Moderates read a promising future in such passages in the Report on which the suggested reforms were based: "We must remember too that the educated Indian has come to the front by hard work; he has seized the education which we offered him because he first saw its advantages; and it is he who has advo- cated and worked for political progress. All this stands to his credit. For thirty years he has developed in his Congress, and latterly in the Moslem League, free popular convocations which express his ideals. We owe him sympathy because he has con- ceived and pursued the idea of managing his own affairs, an aim which no Englishman can fail to respect". These patronizing words tickled the vanity of the rich intellectuals, to whom they meant , a recognition of their own importance by the British government. They also concluded from these phrases that their political point of view had been accepted by the government; the logical con- sequence of which acceptance was a matter of elation to them. They looked forward to the advancement of the interest of their class under the protection and sanction of the British government.

231



The bourgeoisie was further reassured of the prospect of its aggrandizement by the following statement contained in the Report: "We cannot stay their (of the intelHgencia) progress entirely until education has been extended to the masses. . . . We have not succeeded in making education practical. It is only now, when the war has revealed the importance of industry, that

v^e have deliberately set about encouraging Indians to undertake the creation of wealth by industrial enterprise, and thereby have offered the educated classes any tangible inducement to overcome their traditional inclination to look down upon practical forms of energy". The aspirations of the capitalists and liberal intellectuals on their way to be realized even if but partially, the Moderates gave up their opposition to the government. They condemned the un- compromising attitude of the Extremists as imprudent and de- trimental to the constructive progress of the Indian nation. The Congress of 1918 was totally deserted by the Moderates. Gandhi himself, who as a member of the government Commission appointed for making inquiries in connection with the agrarian troubles in Champaran, had glimpsed the volcano of discontent seething

. under the hitherto unruffled surface of the society, expressed a ^ favourable opinion about the Reforms.

But the government was smelling trouble in the air. The first indications of an imminent mass upheaval were to be noticed in the general restiveness all over the country. It was neither ;from the compromising rich bourgeoisie, nor from the objectively impotent but apparently aggressive orthodox nationalism of the lower middle- class intellectuals involuntarily under the influence of the forces of reaction, that the gravest danger was to be expected. Placating the Moderates did not put an end to the possibility of troubles from other quarters. Prolonged economic exploitation intensified during the war, had exhausted the traditional patience

^ of the people, large masses of whom had been herded into the new industrial centres, where they found themselves in conditions worse than before. In the beginning of the war, several thousand

V workers came back from the United States of America where they had emigrated. These emigrants had experienced a higher standard of living in America; they had seen that the ordinary comforts available for the workingmen in other countries were luxuries in comparison with the miserable condition of the Indian toiler, urban as well as rural. Besides, while in America they had

232



received political ideas of a revolutionary trend. They all came "^ back with the intention of overthrowing the British domination. In this they had failed, since the conspiracies of the secret revo- lutionary^ organizations were frustrated in the earher part of the war. But these returned emigrants did more revolutionary service than to take part in an abortive insurrection. Originally they all belonged to the poor peasantry of the north, especially the Punjab. The attempt to organize insurrections being frustated, these re- turned emigrants all went straight into their villages with their new vision and experiences acquired in foreign countries. It was not long before their spirit was caught by the people they came in contact with. There was another factor which rendered similar services in awakening the mass energy. More than a milKon Indian soldiers were sent out to different fronts where they fought side by side with Europeans. In the towns and village of Europe they found even the poorest people living in a condition better than ^ theirs at home. These soldiers were also coming back changed // men. The imminent demobilization would scatter these discontented and disturbing elements broadcast all over the country.

These were the potential sources of the impending danger. Discontent was no longer confined within the small middle class; / it had penetrated the villages, it had rudely shaken the resignation of the masses of Indian people. This situation had not been created by_the agitation of the bourgeois democrats, nor by the aggressive nationalism of the rehgious orthodox. It was brought about by the development of objective forces. Therefore it could not be handled succesfully merely by placating the Moderates and perse- cuting the Extremists. At last there was the menace of a huge popular upheaval, caused essentially by economic exploitation / not alone of imperial capital, but by native agencies as well. The imminent popular upheaval was a social outburst-, the rise of a socially revolutionary force uncompromising, unrelenting, im-, ,^ placable, which would mark the commencement of the inevitableV , class -war.

Success in "rallying the Moderates" did not insure the situation in face of this theatening mass-revolt, which would add immense strength to the Extremists. In fact the latter could take such a firm stand on their poUtical demands only because encouraged, though unconsciously, by the strength that would accrue to the nationahst movement as a result of a mass upheaval. The religious

23 3





* ideology of the orthodoi Extremists was capable of influencing the zeal of the ignorant masses in the first phases of their struggle. The result would be an immense strengthening of the national movement, under the leadership of the Extremist Party. Mass- revolt provoked by a still confused class antagonism, could be easily diverted into the channel of anti-British sentiment. The National Congress threatened to become a really powerful body, in spite of the defection of its founders.

Consequently, the government launched upon a dual policy; it tried to combat the Indian movement with a double-edged sword.

/It adopted the poUcy of conciliation and concession on the one hand, and brutal repression on the other. The Montagu- Chelmsford Reforms typified the former, while the latter was

/ominously heralded by the introduction of the Rowlatt BiU in the Legislature. The apprehension of a great popular outburst, which induced the government to pass emergency legislation putting the country practically under Martial law, was manifest in the following wor^s uttered by the Viceroy in defending the Rowlatt Bill in the Legislative Council. He sounded the alarm saying: ,,the reaction against all authority that has manifested

v- itself in many parts of the civilized world are unlikely to leave India entirely untouched and the powers of evil are still abroad".. The powers which the Viceroy had in mind were evidently dis covered outside the camp of the Extremists, whose following was i

^ still confined to a small section of the lower middle-class. The alarm" was sounded in the beginning of 1919. The echoes of the Russian '

'''^Revolution had been for sometime reverberating upon the horizon of India; the news of the great upheaval of the European working- class as expressed in the German, Hungarian and Bavarian re- volutions was not althogether unknown; serious troubles were ^ brewing among the toiling masses of Japan. There was indeed I ample reason for the British government to be anxious about its ' position and to take precautions. The Rowlatt Bill was enacteil in the face of unanimous opposition from all shades of nationalist opinion. Even the elected Indian members of the Legislative Council voted en bloc against it.

y The agitation against the Rowlatt Bill brought Gandhi prom- inently into the poHtical field. So far he had kept himself prac- tically aloof from any note worthy poUtical activities. Gandhi had seen active demonstration of massactionin South Africa, where he had led

234



the struggle of the Indian emigrants. His recent works in connection with the agrarian revolts in Champaran had also given him a good idea of mass psychology. All his accumulated experience was brought to bear upon the mass energy on the eve of an outburst in India. While the pohtical leaders, Moderates and Extremists- alike, were agitating against the projected coercive measures, there appeared on the scene the magnetic personality of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, an ardent apostle of religious nationalism and a bitter opponent of what he called the "Satanic Western ■/ Civilization" which was being feverishly introduced into India in the form of large capitalist industries. By inaugurating the cam- paign of Satyagraha (passive resistence to evil), an active vent was given to the Opposition, which could thus transcend the limits of mere indignation meetings and passing resolutions of protest. Devoid of any other weapons to fight the British govern- ment, the Indian people were provided in the campaign of passive resistence with a way of making their energy felt by the opponent. Gandhi postulated that the Indian people would "refuse to obey these laws and such other laws", but would at the same time "faithfully follow the truth and refrain from violence to Hfe, person and property". With this vow a committee was organized, which replied to the enactment of the Rowlatt Bill by calhng a Hartal (national strike). Everybody should cease work; all shops should be closed; all business should be suspended.

For the first time in its history, the Indian national movement entered into the period of active struggle, and in doing so it had to call upon the masses of the people. A national strike cannot be carried on with any effect by the lower middle-class, which too is very small in India. The time for mass- action jyas ripe. .Eco- nomic forces, together with other obj ective ' causes had created an atmosphere in which a spontaneous reponse could be expected to a call for a national strike. Had this step been taken several years earher, there would have been hardly any response. Gandhi did not think of backing up the Congress-League demands of 1916 by a Hartal, not even by a big demonstration. Great ideas originate and are determined by the prevailing material conditions. In 1919 the state of affairs was such that the idea of a national strike could be conceived. A considerable portion of the population was in an inflammable state of mind. There had been various strikes in the industrial centres. The call for a Hartal was enthusiastically res-

235



ponded to by the working-class. It was a great mass upheaval, an essentially socio-economic, and not a mere national demonstra- tion, that led up to the Punjab massacres culminating in Amritsar. The powder magazine was there; Gandhi set fire to it. - —

This mighty mass revolt scared the Moderates into the shelter of their spiritual home, under the throne of the Imperial bourgeoisie. They were not slow in issuing a manifesto condemning the Hartal ; which, apparently a demonstration against the government, was essentially a great social upheaval — thej)reludfiJ:joJJiajGQjn^mg^d^ striiggle. Gandhi himself appeared to have surmised instinctively the dangerous character to be eventually assumed by the mighty forces he was instrumental in invoking. Therefore from the very beginning he firmly took his stand on the ground that "truth'

/should be followed by "refraining from violence to property".

t This strong instinct of preserving property rights above all betray> the class affiliation of Gandhi, in spite of his pious outbursts against the sordid materialism of modern civilization. His hostility to capitalist society is manifestly not revolutionary, but reactionary\

i' He believes in the sanctity of private property, but seeks to.prevent its inevitable evolution to capitalism. In the years following the Industrial Revolution, Great Britain was swept by a wave of anti machine philosophy; but it was a revolutionary movement, because the attack against private property was its feature. A radical cure of that civilization so heartily hated by Gandhi, can be effected, not by returning to a backward stage of society based upon private property, but by eliminating property -rights root and branch. And before being altogether eliminated, private property must go through succesive stages of evolution, the highest being capi- .talism. Gandhi took his stand on dangerous ground. He embodies

/simultaneously Revolution and Reaction; he must perish in the fierce clash.

Before spreading to the Punjab, the strike was most successful

• in the industrial districts of the province of Bombay. Several hundred thousand workers in the textile factories mostly owned and managed by native capitalists, not a few of whom were Con- gressmen, were in a state of open revolt, which could be put down only by the free use of machine guns and bombing planes. It was clearly demonstrated that the military machine of the state would always protect the propertied bourgeoisie against any riotous action of the ignorant mob. Gandhi himself confessed that he had

236



underestimated the "forces of evil" he helped let loose upon the / respectable bourgeois order of society. Therefore, while in those stirring days of 1919, there were about fifty thousand textile workers on strike in Ahmedabad, and the railway workers were holding up the traffic in order to prevent the rushing of troops >' to suppress the Punjab revolts by wholesale massacre and terrorism, Gandhi could be found "co-operating" with the "Satanic Govern- ment" in restoring order in his home town (Ahmedabad).

The unerring instinct for safeguarding class -interest reigns \supreme, even in the prophet of spiritual civilization. The valuable, properties of the Guzrati capitalists — notorious for sucking the blood of the Indian people by means of usury — were endangered by the "infuriated mob". Was it possible for any respectable bourgeois believing in the sanctity of private property, to stand aloof ? Not only did Gandhi rush to the rescue, but under his presidency the Satyagraha Committee ruled a temporary suspension of "civil disobedience" and ordered every patriot to follow the noble example of their leader in helping the government restore order.

The response of the Moslem population to the Khilafat pro- paganda also showed that the country was undergoing a great social transformation. The bulk of the Indian Mohamedans had never been well informed of, much less interested in Pan- Islamism, which remained a fashionable cult among the reactionary intellectuals. The fact that the declaration of Jehad during the Tripoli and Balkan Wars, as well as the entrance of Turkey into the great European confUct had, left the Moslem masses of India practically - unmoved, betrayed the weakeness of the assumed religious solidarity on which Pan-Islamism was based. It proved that what could be possible several hundred years ago, had become untenable in the twentieth century. It was not the dismemberment of the Turkish empire that agitated the Indian Moslems in 1919, j when they revolted en masse with the rest of the Indian oppressed ; / class. Their revolt was also brought about by material causes, religion having very little to do with it essentially. Hunger, inten- sified exploitation, and above all the underminig of old property relations by the growth of native capitalism — all these factors contributed to the rebellious mood of the Indian masses, Moslems as well as Hindus. The agitation against the Rowlatt Bill and subsequently the Khilafat propaganda were succesful in stirring

2 37



up a tremendous popular movement, because the ground had been prepared by these fundamental socio-economic causes.

The fiasco of the Hijrat (Khilafat emigration) revealed the superficiality of religious sentiment, held to be so strong among the Indian Moslems. It showed that movements which fail to take deeper causes into consideration and which are based on supposed forces, whose original vitality has been lost in the process of social evolution, are doomed to failure. The best that can be achieved by such movements is futile demonstrations, which but dissipate popular energy and provide some bitter and costly experiences. • By an ukase issued by the high priesthood, the faithful were ■ enjoined to leave the Kafir-ridden India and migrate to the Mo- ' hamedan countries or to swell the forces of Ghazi Mustapha Kemal ' Pasha. This religious edict was very dubiously responded to. Hardly thirty thousand out of the seventy million Moslems of India took part in the holy Hijrat, and more than 90 per cent of these emigrants did not go further than a few dozen miles beyond the Indo- Afghan frontier. The treatment received from the government of the first Moslem country encountered convinced them of then- error and of the advisability of returning home. A close investigation showed that in spite of the religious ardour which undoubtedly

/existed on the surface, it was some material motive or other which actuated almost every one of those emigrants. It was not so much the Fatwa of the Maulana Abul Kalam Azad as the declaration of the Afghan Ameer to the effect that every Indian Moslem coming to his territories would be given free land as well as some working capital, that induced most of the emigrants to leave home. Of course, there were some yoiing visionaries among them, and a number of daring adventurers bent on making fame and fortune upon some unknown battle-field.

No, it was not the indignation over the violation of the Khilafat, nor the capture of the Holy places by the infidel that agitated the Moslem masses of India. They felt the impulse of the same social upheaval as shook their Hindu compatriots from their age-long i resignation and apathy. (The great wave of mass energy, which ' threw Gandhi and his colleagues in the national movement on to the towering crest of leadership, was raised neither by the awakening national consciousness of the Hindus, nor by the religious fervor

/ of the^oslems. It was the revolt of the exploited masses, still unconscipus of their purpose. It was provoked neither by the

238 I



personality, however magnetic, of a prophet preaching a bankrupt gospel, not by the injunction of theological authorities, nor by the equivocal opposition of the bourgeois nationalist. The dynamic causes had been accumulating for a longtime ; thefireof discontent and unrest had been smoldering under the surface for years. At last the flames of open revolt broke out under such auspices that its essential social significance could be confused with wild political demonstrations. It^ is not. the awakening national consciousness, but the socio- eci)nomic struggle of the exploited masses that has lent apparent potentiality to the poUtical movement of the bourgeoisie. But the revolt of the exploited masses connot be for any length of time a dependable force behind the nationalism of the bourgeoisie. It was possible in the past, in countries in which different socio-poUtical institutions obtained; in which the liberal democratic movement of the national bourgeoisie was based upon class antagonism. But the world has changed since then, and the relation between the classes of Indian society today do not correspond to those of central Europe in the forties and fifties of the nineteenth century, nor to those of the British American Colonies towards the end of the eighteenth century, nor to those of the ItaHan states in the sixties. Bitter war between the classes is being waged all over the world. This world situation cannot but be reflected in the Indian move- ment. The awakening of mass energy, which has strengthened the movement for national liberation and which alone is capable of making this mov-ement a success, at the same time weakens the position of the bourgeois nationaHst movement.

The present situation in India is not unique in history. It is a stage of social development marked by a sudden and rapid intro- duction of modern means of production, resulting in a dislocation of the status quo, economic as well as territorial, of the population. Great Britain passed through a similar epoch in the years following the Reform Bill of 1832 and leading up to the Chartist Movement. But the same development cannot be expected to take place in India, although similar social and political tendencies are to be noticed in the movement. The propertied middle-class, which eventually dominated the situation in England as a result of the Reform Bill and the failure of the Chartist Movement, does not occupy an identical socio-pohtical position in India today. The struggle of the Indian bourgeoisie is not against a government controlled by rich landed aristocracy with strong feudal tra-

239



ditions ; it is against the highest form of capitalism in an extremely- critical moment of its existence. Consequently, there^s_a_great ' possibility of_compromise in this struggle.

Then, Democracy, the'^ogan of the English middle-class in the days of the Reform Bill and Chartism, has lost all its illusive charms. After the bitter experience of almost a century, it stands to-day naked in its true character, which is the dictatorship of the

^bourgeoisie heading towards a plutocratic ImperiaUsm. The struggle of the English bourgeoisie took place when capitalist society was in the process of building. The Nationalism of India tends towards

>- the aggrandisement of the native bourgeoisie at a time whea capitalism has gone bankrupt — when it is collapsing under its own contradictions aU over the world. In the thirties and forties of the nineteenth century, the bourgeoisie was a revolutionary factor in England as well as on the Continent. It was struggling to build a new civilization on the ruins of the old. To their great

• misfortune, this much cannot be said of the bourgeois nationalists of India. They have appeared too late on the scene. It is not their fault. They did not choose to be late. They were kept back by Imperialism. They are late, all the same; and, therefore, cannot *^/ be expected to play the same role as their kind played in other countries in more opportune times. In relation to the past and present Indian society taken as a whole, they are undoubtedly revolutionary. But they are trying to build what is crumbling

/the world over. They happen to be at the head of a revolutionary- movement at a period when their class has ceased to be a revo- lutionary social jforce.

The Indian bourgeoisie today stands between two fires: one

v/ just beginning to break into flames still clouded with thick smoke, the other large and awe inspiring, but its imposing glare is not that of living flames — it is of burning embers, to be soon covered with ashes. On one side is the great social upheaval fomented

V by the rising tide of mass energy which it endeavors to manipulate according to its own benefit and convenience; on the other side stands the Imperial Power intent upon maintaining its poUtical and economic hegemony, but at the same time showing inclination- to compromise. The unbridled advance of the first, which alom^

^ can deliver a death blow to Imperial domination, spells a serious menace to the designs of the nationalist bourgeoisie ; while to enter into partnership with Imperial capital is not a bad prospect. But

240



the Indian bourgeoisie, by itself, is too weak to make the Imperialist Government pay heed to its demands. Therefore it must depend upon mass action for imposing its will. This is playing with fire, digging one's own grave. It has been demonstrated on various occasions during the last three years, that the mass movement;/—^ cannot always be kept within the limits set according to the con- *^ venience of the bourgeoisie. Signs are already to be seen that the workers and peasants, who are steadily emerging from the first confusion of a great social upheaval, do not find the Congress and Khilafat programs include their interests. The inevitable conse- quence of these tendencies is the eventual divorce of the mass /^^ / movement from bourgeois leadership./ In that case, bourgeois "Hw nationalism will end in a compromise with Imperial supremacy, and the Hberation of India will be left to the political movement of the workers and peasants, consciously organized and fighting on the grounds of class -struggle.
